[WIP] Write chapter_Ethics law policy (#1394)
alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way: book/website/ethical-research/law-policy.md

# Ethics and Law, Policy and Human Rights

## Prerequisites / recommended skill level
None

## Summary
Law, human rights and policy all relate to ethics, but they are not the same thing.

You should be aware of the laws and policies that apply to you and your work.
However, this is not sufficient to ensure that your work is ethical. 

Human rights provide a legal framework for protecting individuals. 

> However, it operates at national and international level.

Author: ```suggestion
However, this framework operates at national and international level.
```

> However, it operates at national and international level.

Author: clarified!

As well as giving you a deeper understanding, it can also help you advocate for ethical work with colleagues and collaborators.

## Law

This is not legal advice. Please read for information only! 
[Link to central page on 'this book is not a lawyer' - not written yet, but there is an issue open here: https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way/issues/1469)]

### Ethics and law

Laws have been made by humans.
They reflect the outcomes of negotiations between different people, with different interests and different amounts of power.
Complying with laws is usually necessary, but *rarely sufficient*, to ensure that you are acting ethically.

### Domestic and regional law

You should be aware of what laws cover your work.
This will depend on which jurisdictions you work in: usually the geographical area covered by a law.
You should be aware of the laws that cover you at local, state or regional, national, and international levels. 

You should also be aware what steps you should take to ensure that you are compliant with all relevant laws. 
This section is not exhaustive!

> It is designed to give you some idea of the kinds of laws you should be aware of.

Reviewer: I would emphasize that "work" here refers to "data science" or "open data science." If those areas are not exhaustive or incorrect, it would be helpful to specify a bit what type of work the chapter is seeking to address.

#### Data protection law

Data protection laws cover what is permitted by law when collecting and processing data. 
The aim of data protection laws is to protect the privacy of individuals when collecting and using information about them.

Data protection laws need to be updated frequently in order to make sure they cover all the ways that different actors are using new forms of technology to collect and use data in new ways. 
Because data protection laws sit at the limits of what companies - especially big tech giants - are able to do, the process of making, updating and enforcing data protection laws has become increasingly newsworthy.

> New pieces of legislation such as the General Data Protection Regulation ([GDPR](https://gdpr-info.eu/)) in the EU have attracted a lot of attention.

Reviewer: I suggest "For example, new pieces of legislation..."

They often produce guidance on how to comply with data protection laws in their country.
Wikipedia has a [list of data protection authorities](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_data_protection_authority) covering lots of countries.

Data protection laws are sometimes confused with privacy laws, but they are not the same thing. 

#### Privacy law

Privacy laws protect people's ability to keep themselves, or information about themselves, away from public view. 
The specific content of privacy laws varies between jurisdictions.
Laws may be general, or they may only cover certain kinds of information, sometimes referred to as 'sensitive information' or 'personally identifiable information.'
This might include, for example, medical or financial information about a person.

Privacy laws have periodically been updated to take into account new technologies, which have offered new ways for privacy to be invaded and for information about people to be shared. 
This started in the 19th century when newspapers became widespread, and is still happening as legislators try to keep up with developments in the internet and in data collection.

> Privacy is sometimes confused with data protection, but it is much broader. 

Reviewer 2: This line is really interesting. Could there be an example to clarify? I can't come up with a good one, sadly! Maybe peeking into people's homes is one?

Reviewer: +1, examples of cases that help differentiate between the different entities each law set covers would be a great addition! I would not mind toy examples for the law newbie like me 😄

You should know the terms of contracts you have signed, and what those terms mean.
You should also know which jurisdiction covers the contract you have signed (this should be in the contract). 

Ethical work can also include thinking critically about contracts.
You should think about what obligations you are signing up for when you sign a contract.
You should also think about what contractual obligations you are imposing on other people when you form a contract with them.

### How to change laws

Law is not static and unchanging. 
The law is made by humans and it can be changed by humans.
If you feel that the law in your jurisdiction works in a way that is unhelpful or damaging, consider joining efforts to change it!
Changing laws is a long-term project and can take decades. 
This section is not intended to explain how to do this: a good place to start is to find a campaigning organisation who is working on the issue, and ask them how to get involved. 
<!--- edit this to refer to the activism chapter, when we have written it --> 

## Policy

Policy is a general term for a set of ideas or principles that guide actions in particular situations.

> Policies are not legally binding, but they are designed to encourage certain kinds of behaviours and discourage others.

Author: ```suggestion
Policies are not legally binding, but they are designed to encourage certain kinds of behaviours and discourage others.
For example, the Turing Way community agrees to abide by the policy set out in the [Code of Conduct](https://the-turing-way.netlify.app/community-handbook/coc.html).
```

Policies are agreed between groups of people: this can be at organisational, intra-organisational, or governmental level. 
It is useful to be aware, for example, of policies on ethical research and innovation that are set by your government, or your funding organisation.

> 

Reviewer: I think that it would be helpful to give concrete examples of policies that relate to Ethics. I would also mention Codes of Conduct as policies that help in RRI and RI, as mentioned in the book's introduction. I would start by giving examples of The Turing Way policies. For example, the [ethical guidelines for statistical practice of the American Statistical Association](https://www.amstat.org/ASA/Your-Career/Ethical-Guidelines-for-Statistical-Practice.aspx) could be another example.

Author: ```suggestion
For example, the American Statistical Association has created [ethical guidelines for statistical practice](https://www.amstat.org/ASA/Your-Career/Ethical-Guidelines-for-Statistical-Practice.aspx).
```

Author: great idea to add TTW code of conduct! I have also added the ASA policy.

Some countries have ratified some of the treaties that apply to them: this means that they have incorporated the content of the the treaties into their national law.
Many countries also have a national human rights institution, which independently monitors and investigates human rights violations in that country, and advises the government on implementing their obligations. 

Countries that have signed treaties have committed to implementing them.
However, the process of implementing treaties in full, so that every person in a country can enjoy all the rights in a treaty, is very long and requires lots of actions from states.
Campaigning groups, including non-governmental organisations, work to narrow the gap between what countries have promised to do, and what they have actually done so far. 
Some campaigning groups are international and work on lots of different human rights issues. 
Some work only on a small number of issues, or in a small area of the world.

### How do human rights apply to data science and research ethics?

> Human rights are more concrete than ethics, because they are defined in law. 

Author: ```suggestion
Human rights are defined in law. 
This means in many ways they are less malleable than ethics.
The letter of human rights, and the ways that they are implemented, are agreed internationally,
A violation of human rights is a violation wherever it happens. 
This is not necessarily true of codes of ethics. 
An action that one group of people sees as ethical, may be seen as unethical by others. 
```

There is a wider shared understanding of what human rights means across different countries, cultures and groups of people.
There are accountability and enforcement mechanisms.

> But because they are a legal framework, they are more difficult to understand and apply to the daily work of data science and research.

Reviewer 2: Is the point here to say how human rights and ethics differ, or how human rights apply to data science and research ethics? If the former, questions in applied ethics can be more concrete than human rights, so I am unsure the distinction is clear in that sense. If the latter, I think it is worth reiterating that human rights are a necessary aspect of ethical research (similar point made in line 31).

And line 207 makes the point that human rights are more difficult to understand because of their constituting a legal framework. Might it be more accurate to say they are "not very accessible" because of this? I think my contention is that we might accidentally oversimplify the human rights-ethics distinction by saying "X is more concrete/difficult/other-adjective because Y" and leaving it there (for example: I would imagine ethics is more difficult because of how so many philosophers have written!).

Author: edited to clarify both of these points - very helpful, thanks!

> But because they are a legal framework, they are more difficult to understand and apply to the daily work of data science and research.

Author: ```suggestion
But because they are a legal framework, they are not as easily accessible, and hard to apply to the daily work of data science and research.
```

# Ethics and Law, Policy and Human Rights

## Prerequisites / recommended skill level
None

## Summary
Law, human rights and policy all relate to ethics, but they are not the same thing.

You should be aware of the laws and policies that apply to you and your work.
However, this is not sufficient to ensure that your work is ethical. 

> Human rights provide a legal framework for protecting individuals. 

Reviewer 2: It can be challenged that human rights provide legal frameworks at all.

Author: What do you mean? International human rights law is a legal framework that is enforceable at international levels. It's very slow and not particularly accessible, but it is a system of law.

NGOs and other campaigning organisations also produce guidance on specific areas:
- [The Toronto Declaration: Protecting the rights to equality and non-discrimination in machine learning systems](https://www.accessnow.org/the-toronto-declaration-protecting-the-rights-to-equality-and-non-discrimination-in-machine-learning-systems/)(_prepared by Amnesty International and Access Now and it has been endorsed by Human Rights Watch and Wikimedia Foundation_)

Making sure that research complies with human rights is not just about ensuring that it doesn't harm.
It can also be about doing work that is actively pro-rights. 

Researchers and data scientists should, in general ensure that they:
- **respect** human rights: this means not doing work that itself abuses human rights 
- **protect** human rights: this means trying to ensure that their work cannot be used by others to abuse human rights
- **fulfil** human rights: this means doing work that actively helps other people be able to enjoy all their human rights

## Checklist
- [ ] Do I know what laws apply to my work? 
- [ ] Do I know what policies apply to my work?
- [ ] Have I read relevant policies on ethical research?

> - [ ] Does my work respect and protect human rights?

Author: ```suggestion
- [ ] Have I asked the Policy and Governance teams at my organisation or institution for advice or support?
- [ ] Does my work respect and protect human rights?
```

> - [ ] Does my work fulfil human rights?

Reviewer 2: Add: Have I engaged with the organisation's Governance/Policy teams? (Make it a more proactive approach)

Author: added!

(er-law-policy)=

> # Ethics and Law, Policy and Human Rights

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Law, Policy and Human Rights in Ethics
```
